Eric Frederick Trump (born January 6, 1984) is an American businessman and former reality TV personality. He is the third child and second son of the President of the United States, Donald Trump, and Ivana Trump. Alongside his older brother Don Jr., he serves as a trustee of The Trump Organization. A longtime Executive VP in the company, in his new role as trustee, Trump and his brother will run the company during their father's presidency.
In 2006, he founded the Eric Trump Foundation, which raises money for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.


== Early life and education ==
Trump was born in Manhattan and attended Trinity School. His parents divorced in 1991, when he was seven years old. In 2002, he graduated from The Hill School and subsequently served on its board, until 2013. He graduated with a degree in finance and management, with honors, from Georgetown University in Washington, D.C.


== Career ==


=== The Trump Organization ===
Trump is an executive vice president of development and acquisitions. He was also a task adviser and boardroom judge on NBC's The Apprentice. His corporate responsibility is the domestic and global expansion of the company's real estate interests. With his father, he has overseen the expansion of the Trump Golf portfolio of properties, increasing the number from three, when he joined the company, in 2006, to over 15, with courses in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Florida, North Carolina, California, and Puerto Rico. He identifies and pursues distressed golf properties for domestic and global expansion and has been responsible, with his sister, Ivanka, for the redesign and renovation of Trump National Doral and its Blue Monster course in Miami, Florida.
He and his siblings are credited with the creation and management of the Trump Hotel Collection properties. Trump's current management portfolio of global hotels includes Las Vegas, Chicago, New York, Toronto, Panama, Waikiki, Punta del Este, Washington D.C., Vancouver, the Philippines, and Rio de Janeiro. He also executed the acquisition of the Kluge Winery and Vineyard in Charlottesville, Virginia, resulting in the creation of Trump Winery. In 2013, Trump earned Wine Enthusiast Magazine's "Rising Star of the Year" Award.
In 2012, Trump was recognized by Forbes magazine among their top "30 under 30" in real estate and by the New York Observer as one of the "20 Most Important Young Philanthropists". The New York Observer is published by his brother-in-law, Jared Kushner.


== The Eric Trump Foundation ==

Eric Trump established the Eric Trump Foundation in 2006, with the purpose to raise money for terminally-ill children and cancer patients at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.
According to publicly available IRS tax filings to the end of 2014, the foundation has relied solely on fundraising from others at golf events. During that nine-year period, the foundation reported raising a total of $8,054,000. A recent letter from the fundraising president of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Richard C. Shadyac Jr., confirmed that The Eric Trump Foundation has raised and donated $16.3 million dollars to the hospital over the past 10 years.
In 2014, the Eric Trump Foundation hosted its first annual "Race and Taste 10K" charity event at the Trump Organization's Trump Winery, to raise money for St Jude's. For 2013 and 2014, the foundation reported in its tax filings that it raised $3,123,507 at golf charity events and that it paid $472,374 of costs for the events hosted at the Trump Organization golf club, categorized as "other direct expenses".
Trump said in July 2016 that his father, Donald Trump, had made "hundreds of thousands of dollars in personal donations" to the Eric Trump Foundation in the past, although the Eric Trump Foundation's tax records don't explicitly show such donations. When The Washington Post followed up for evidence, Trump appeared to backtrack and refused to give details.


== Controversies ==


=== The Eric Trump Foundation ===
The Eric Trump Foundation has advertised that its golf charity events raised money exclusively for St Jude's Children's Research Hospital, with 95-100% of the money raised going toward the charity. However, public tax records show that the foundation applied significant amounts of the funds raised to pay costs of the events to the Trump Organization for use of its facilities, casting doubt on the claim. Additionally, the foundation donated to charitable causes other than St Jude and made grants to several other charities, including at least three animal welfare organizations and the American Society for Enology and Viticulture, a California wine industry organization.
However, on December 30, 2016, the fundraising president of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Richard C. Shadyac Jr., issued an official letter refuting recent media claims and confirmed that The Eric Trump Foundation has raised and donated $16.3 million dollars to the hospital since the charity's inception 10 years ago 


=== Trophy hunting ===
In 2010, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) criticized Trump, a trophy hunter, for an African hunting trip he took with Donald Trump, Jr., his older brother. PETA condemned the pair after photos showed the brothers on an organized safari in Zimbabwe, where they hunted animals. The director general of the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority, V. Chandenga, issued an official response supporting the brothers and calling any allegations of illegality "baseless" and "false". Both brothers defended their safari via Twitter, affirming their actions as hunters and longtime advocates of the outdoors. Their father also addressed the controversy, saying on TMZ that he fully supported his sons.


=== Sexual harassment in the workplace ===

On August 2, 2016, in a television appearance on CBS This Morning, Trump was asked to comment on his father's controversial statement to USA Today the previous day in which he said that if his daughter were ever subjected to sexual harassment in the workplace, he hoped she would find another company to work for or switch careers. Eric Trump said, "Ivanka is a strong, powerful woman, she wouldn't allow herself to be objected [sic] to it". The younger Trump's comments drew widespread criticism from individuals and organizations claiming that this logic puts the blame for sexual harassment on the victims and contends that only weak women are subject to harassment. Critics included Gretchen Carlson, a former Fox News anchor who sued Fox chief executive Roger Ailes for harassment, and Megyn Kelly, who was also a Fox News anchor at the time.


== Personal life ==
On July 4, 2013, Trump became engaged to his longtime girlfriend Lara Lea Yunaska (born October 12, 1982), an associate producer at the syndicated television news program Inside Edition. They married on November 8, 2014, at Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida, and had their wedding ceremony under a "crystal-embellished chuppa[h]".


== References ==


== External links ==
Appearances on C-SPAN